---
title: Learning to Type
layout: post
categories: [keyboards, typing]
customexcerpt: "I used to type with 4 fingers my entire life. I learnt how to touch type in 2019, and while it was hard, it was also the best decision I made."
description: "How I learnt to touch type, and improved my typing speed over the course of time."
---

I got my first computer in 2003. It was a Pentium IV processor, and the system
had 128MB of RAM and a 40GB IDE hard drive. I didn't have access to the
Internet, but I remember constantly being on the computer. While I had a few
games, Midtown Madness, Motocross Madness and the old Spider-Man game, I really
spent a lot of time typing.

I'd spent the summer learning HTML and Javascript, and while it wasn't much, I
was busy learning to make webpages. I would visit internet cafes, go onto
[dragonballz.com](https://www.dragonballz.com) and I would download photos to
bring home on 2.5" floppy drives. I was busy making my own DBZ wiki. I wonder
where the source code for that is. It would be fun to look at it.

I remember learning C in the pre-university years. I picked it up rather well,
but I never really got around to doing anything with it. I never encountered
K&R growing up.

My first Operating System was Windows 98, but I soon moved on to Windows ME. I
think I was one of the few people who liked it. I eventually moved onto Windows
2000, and I was in love with it.

I think I started using XP only out of curiosity, but by then, my poor Pentium
IV could not handle it. I'd upgraded to 1GB of RAM and got my first Graphics
Card (NVIDIA, but I don't know what model it was.) I was fairly happy, and I
remember trying to play more games on it.

I eventually got a broadband connection in 2005, and I was online.

But more than the games, I remember typing, *a lot*. I never learned to type,
but I was typing constantly. I had friends I chatted with on MSN Messenger,
Yahoo Messenger, and eventually, GTalk. I remember switching to the MirandaIM
Messenger because my computer couldn't handle Yahoo Messenger any longer. I
never used voice calls, but I was always on the internet, chatting.

In retrospect, I wonder why I never learnt to type. It seemed to me that it was
pointless. I could manage with 4 fingers. It was a weird mess. I'd use one of
either thumb for the space bar, and I'd use my index fingers for all the rest
of the letters.

I don't know how I managed to get to a point where I typed entire books using
this method.

I was aspiring to be a published writer, and my typing methods really didn't
hinder me.  I would type into the night, and I never thought about learning how
to type.

In 2006, I took the leap and switched to Linux, since my poor computer could no
longer handle Windows XP. A friend of mine recommended Linux Mint, and I
installed Mint 7, *Gloria*. It was a lovely OS, and I am still using the most
recent version of Linux Mint today. It is my favourite Operating System to say
the least, and I install it on all my computers.

I didn't get back to programming for a long time. My time at the computer
didn't change, but I was mostly chatting, or reading random things on the
Internet. That was a whole lot of wasted time.

In 2018, well into the start of a programming career, I realized I had a
problem. I couldn't type for longer periods without my wrists hurting. It was a
result of my bad typing habits, and I needed to change.

I wasn't ready to, because while I still didn't know how to touch-type, I could
type without looking at the keyboard. It was muscle-memory, and I wasn't sure
how to change it.

In 2019, just after giving my 2 months' notice (it was a longer notice period
at my previous company), I decided to invest time in teaching myself how to
type.

It was going to be hard. It was not easy.

I began with a few touch-typing websites. I'm not sure which was the first one
I went to, I think it was [typingclub.com](https://www.typingclub.com/). It
helped me learn the basic hand positions, and it also gave fun exercises and
games that drove the key positions in. My fingers *hurt* like never before.
Each muscle was straining. They didn't want to go through this.

I then went to [keybr](https://keybr.com) to train myself further. I was
surprised at how quickly you learn to type when you put your mind to it.

The exercises at Keybr helped me the most. The repetition, and the word-like
tokens really drove in the habit.

I never measured what my typing speed was before I learned to touch type. I
remember that during the first few weeks of using Keybr, my speed was around 45
to 60 word per minute, but my accuracy was very poor.

It's been 2 years since I've learnt to touch type, and now my accuracy is
nearly 100% and my speed averages at 97 wpm.

I recommend learning touch typing if you can spare the time for it. Here are
some tips that helped me.

1. When you're learning, make sure you *stop* typing the old way immediately.
   You shouldn't be alternating.
2. If you can afford it, a blank keys keyboard is the best to learn, but you
   can also try putting round stickers on the keys of your existing keyboard.
3. It helps if you have to do a lot of (low-priority) typing in the weeks that
   follow. Perhaps if you're on a deadline, it might not be the best time to do
   this.
4. It also helps if you can practice on keybr until you successfully learn all
   the keys.

Learning special characters took the longest time. You can't train for this,
but for regular punctuation, I greatly recommend
[monkeytype.com](https://monkeytype.com) and [typelit.io](https://typelit.io).
Both provide actual sentences to type, and these usually have punctuation.
Typelit also gives you entire books to practice on, so it is a way of "reading"
while you type. I've lately started typing a few pages out of George Orwell's
    1984 every day before I start work.

Finally, keep practicing. Some people prefer
[nitrotype.com](https://www.nitrotype.com), which seems more competitive as
opposed to something at your own pace. I've tried it, but it isn't for me. I
prefer practising solo. If you continue to practice, you will only keep your
skills honed, and while it might feel like a waste of time, you can think of it
as a way to warm your fingers up before a day of work.
